Career Paths for Programmers

By John Bennett, Jr. <https://www.developerdotstar.com/mag/bios/john_bennett.html>

I recently interviewed for a Business Analyst position with the CIO of a large multinational software development firm. This
man was in charge of the company’s worldwide IT operations, including offshore development projects, for which he
was searching for qualified Business Analysts. The interview quickly became a casual conversation about current trends
within the IT service sector, how the company was planning to take advantage of those trends, and, most importantly,
how I could fit into those plans. It was during his evaluation of my skills that I asked how I fit and whether it
was technical or business skills that were most valuable to his projects. The CIO summed up his advice about my career
path with one small sentence: “Stay on the business side.”

Business skills, in this CIO’s view, were most important to his future projects and the industry as a whole. His reasoning
was that he could train anyone in the technical skills he needed for a project, but finding those people with the
necessary business skills to guide an IT project to success was something that could not easily be obtained. He went
on to say that he found it difficult to find people who could communicate on even the most basic of levels. I asked
if my background as a developer would help in getting a business analyst job, and he conceded that although it’s
not a requirement, it certainly would help matters as long as I could prove that I wasn’t “too technical.”

His comments are consistent with the trend that all US-based programmers have observed since the late 1990’s: global salary
competition amongst programmers, and a growing view in big business of programming as a commodity skill. It’s hard
to compete with a developer in Russia or India who can work for a fraction of what I make minus benefits. The CIO
managed to reaffirm the subtle, but major, shift from technical skills to business-technical skills in today's labor
market. I gave weight to his viewpoint since the people in his position are the trendsetters of the technology industry.
They are the ones who set the directives for a company’s IT needs, and often, the requirements desired for the higher-paying
positions.

I did a little research and found that the US Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook predicts that computer
systems analysts are expected to be among the fastest growing occupations through 2012. The Handbook describes a
systems analyst as someone who may plan and develop new computer systems or devise ways to apply existing systems’
resources to additional operations. It describes a computer programmer as someone who writes programs according to
the specifications determined by systems analysts. (The book does not separately list business analyst as an occupation.)

According to the Handbook, in the US systems analysts held an astounding 487,000 positions in 2004 (up from 468,000 positions
in 2002) compared with 455,000 jobs in 2004 for computer programmers (down from 499,000 in 2002). The Handbook also
states that employment for computer programmers is “expected to grow much more slowly than that for other computer
specialists.” And recent estimates by the Economic Policy Institute have put the number of jobs being offshored at
approximately 330,000 to 500,000 jobs. About 100,000 of those were full-time computer programming jobs.

The key to maintaining a good employment outlook in IT, it seems, is to move out of programming and up into more business-oriented
IT positions such as systems analyst, business analyst, project manager, or systems architect. However, a computer
programmer can’t just decide to become a systems analyst or project manager overnight. The journey takes time and
requires the right amount of experience and learning to be successful.

Making the Shift

So you’ve seen the statistics and watched as the jobs in your market slowly disappear. You want to move more to the “business
side,” but you don't quite know how to do it. As I’ll describe next, making the shift can be done on-the-job by gaining
more responsibility, polishing up your problem-solving skills, and using creativity in your work.

I began my journey into systems analysis and design by accepting more responsibilities throughout the project I was on when
things proved too overwhelming for my superiors. I gradually accepted more of the project management and business
analysis responsibilities when the opportunity presented itself. For example, I would walk to Suzy in accounting
and work out a new enhancement with her one-on-one rather than wait for my manager to do so. Over time, as my manager’s
confidence in my abilities grew, these responsibilities became a part of my job. It wasn’t long before I became the
Programmer Analyst, and ultimately the Project Manager, as new positions were created to fulfill demand for our work.

When the need arises, I recommend walking to the end user yourself and working with her one-on-one. Your manager will be
relieved when he discovers that you are capable of communicating with his end-users, identifying their issues, and
resolving those issues before they are brought up in the weekly manager’s meeting. Even the best IT managers need
a subordinate who is visible to the users who they can trust to get the job done. If a manager is slowly factoring
himself away from the day-to-day workings of the project, welcome it. The higher visibility that you are obtaining
can be translated into higher value—and that can result in a promotion. Over time, your increased interactions with
more business-oriented people will make you more sensitive to business concerns.

A good subordinate has to be open-minded and creative. When solving problems, one has to always believe that there is a way
to accomplish something, even if it's never been done before. Sometimes, just listening to the user will produce
an idea. A lot of issues may come down to the business process that the system is attempting to replicate. I have
had users actually solve a business problem for me just by listening to what they had to say!

Whether you’re open-minded and creative or not, you can still work towards more business-oriented positions. After all, business
systems analysts and project managers are only a small subset of the many positions opening up each year to address
the issues of complexity through simplicity. If you love programming, you don't have to necessarily give it up.